=head1 NAME

Web::DataService::Configuration - configuration attributes and how to use them

=head1 SYNOPSIS

This document lists the various attributes available for you to use in
configuring a data service with L<Web::DataService>.

=head1 SYNTAX

The various configuration methods provided by L<Web::DataService> all use a
consistent syntax.  With the possible exception of an initial name argument,
all of the rest of the arguments must be either hashrefs or strings.  The
hashrefs each configure some object, and the strings each document the object
that they follow.  We refer to this mix of attribute hashrefs and
documentation strings as a I<definition list>.

    $ds->define_format(
	{ name => 'json', content_type => 'application/json',
	  doc_node => 'formats/json', title => 'JSON',
	  default_vocab => 'com' },
	    "The JSON format is intended primarily to support client applications,",
	    "including the PBDB Navigator.  Response fields are named using compact",
	    "3-character field names.",
	{ name => 'xml', disabled => 1, content_type => 'text/xml', title => 'XML',
	  doc_node => 'formats/xml',
	  default_vocab => 'dwc' },
	    "The XML format is intended primarily to support data interchange with",
	    "other databases, using the Darwin Core element set.");

For example, the above call defines two response formats: one named 'json' and
the other named 'xml'.  Each of these formats is defined by the set of
attributes contained in a hashref.  The documentation strings are
automatically collected (joined by newlines) as the attribute C<doc_string> of
the object whose definition they immediately follow.

Note that this does not apply to C<< Web::DataService->new >>, which must be
called with a single hash argument only.

=head2 Attribute value syntax

In general, whenever an attribute can take a list of values, you specify those
values as a string with the items separated by commas and arbitrary
whitespace.  For example, the following are identical:

   output => 'basic , extra'
   output => 'basic,extra'

=head1 CONFIGURATION PROCESS

In order to fully define a data service using this framework, your code must
carry out the following steps (see L<Web::DataService::Tutorial> for
more about this):

=over

=item 1.

Load one or more modules ("operation modules") that can serve as L<Moo>
L<roles|Moo::Role>.  The subroutines that implement your data service
operations must be placed in these modules.

=item 2.

Generate a new L<instance of Web::DataService|/Data service instantiation>.

=item 3.

Define one or more L<output vocabularies|/Vocabulary definitions> using
C<define_vocab>.  This step is optional, and a default vocabulary consisting
of the field names and values obtained from the backend will be automatically
used if you do not specify any.

=item 4.

Define one or more L<response formats|/Response format definitions> using
C<define_format>.  This must follow any vocabulary definitions, and must
precede the node definitions.

=item 5.

Define some L<data service nodes|/Node definitions> using C<define_node>.

=item 6.

Define one or more L<output blocks|/Output block definitions> using
C<define_block>.  These may occur in any order with respect to the node
definitions.

=item 7.

Define L<value sets|/Set definitions> using C<define_set> (or
C<define_output_map>).  This step is optional, but you will need to do this if
you wish to provide variable output.  These definitions must occur before any
output blocks that depend on them.

=item 8.

Define one or more L<parameter validation rulesets|/Ruleset definitions> using
C<define_ruleset>.  These may occur in any order with respect to the other
definitions.

=back

If some or all of your operation modules define a subroutine called
C<initialize>, this will be called once for each module as soon as the module
name is encountered as the value of a C<role> attribute in a node definition.
You can also trigger this explicitly by calling C<initialize_role>.  The
routine will be called as a class method, so the module name will be the first
argument.  The data service instance will be the second, so you can use that
to make further definitions.

You may find it convenient to put some or all of the definitions from steps
5-8 (C<define_node>, C<define_block>, C<define_set>, C<define_output_map>,
C<define_ruleset>) in these initialization routines.  That will serve to
locate these definitions together with the operations to which they apply.

You may instead find it convenient to put all of the node definitions
together, either in the main application file or in some subsidiary module, so
that the hierarchical relationships will be apparent.  Exactly how you
structure your applicaton is up to you.

=head1 CONFIGURATION DETAILS

The attributes that you can use in defining these different types of elements
are listed in the following sections.

=head2 Data service instantiation

A new data service is instantiated by calling the C<new> method of
L<Web::DataService|Web::DataService/"new">, as follows:

    my $ds = Web::DataService->new({ name => 'data1.0', ... });

The "..." in the above example represents some set of attributes chosen from
the list below.  With a few exceptions noted below, any attributes that you do
not specify in the call to C<new> will be looked up in the configuration file
provided by the foundation framework (F<config.yml> in the case of L<Dancer>).
Any not specified there will be given default values, as indicated in the
documentation for the individual attributes.  For most attributes, it is up to
you whether to specify them in the instantiation call or in the configuration
file.

When a new data service is instantiated, attributes that are not explicitly
specified in the instantiation call are looked up in the configuration file
under the value provided for the required attribute C<name>.  If not found,
they are then looked up as direct attributes.  For example, if the
configuration file has the contents listed below, the above call will produce
a data service with a C<default_limit> of C<1000> and a C<default_header> of
C<1>.  This allows you to configure several different data services that share
some attribute values but not others.

    default_limit: 500
    default_header: 1
    
    data1.0:
	default_limit: 1000
    
    data2.0:
        default_limit: 1200

=head2 Data service attributes

In the list below, entries indicated by C<[req]> are required attributes.
Those indicated by C<[inst]> must be specified in the call to C<new> rather
than in the configuration file.  Those indicated by C<[mod]> have default
values according to which modules have been loaded at the time the data
service is instantiated.

All of the data service attributes have identically-named accessor methods.
These are all read-only; the attributes may only be set at the time of
instantiation.

=head3 name [req] [inst]

Specifies a unique identifier for this data service.  You must specify this in
the instantiation call, because it is used to find attribute values in the
configuration file.

=head3 features [req] [inst]

Specifies the set of built-in features to be enabled for this data service.
The value of this attribute must be a comma-separated list of feature names
from the list given below.  You can turn a feature off by prefixing its name
with C<no_>, and you can use 'standard' to enable all of the available
features.  So the following will enable all of the features except
"doc_paths":

    features => 'standard, no_doc_paths'

while the following will enable just 'format_suffix' and 'documentation':

    features => 'format_suffix, documentation'

The individual features are as follows:

=head4 format_suffix

This feature causes the response format of any request to be set from the suffix
on the URL path.  If enabled, a request with the URL path "/my/operation.json"
will select the operation corresponding to the data service node
"my/operation" and will render the output using the "json" format.

=head4 documentation

This feature will auto-generate documentation pages for the various data
service operations.  If enabled, the URL path "/" will always generate a main
documentation page, and a URL without any suffix will generate a documentation
page corresponding to the selected data service node.  You are also able to
create additional documentation nodes and templates at will.  In order to make
use of this feature, you must also ensure that a L<templating
plugin|/"templating_plugin"> is loaded.

=head4 doc_paths

This feature will enable additional URL paths for accessing documentation.  If
enabled, a request with the URL path "/my/operation_doc" or (if
C<format_suffix> is also enabled) "/my/operation_doc.html" will produce the
documentation page for the data service node "my/operation".  So will
"/my/operation/index.html".  The URL path "/my/operation" (or
"/my/operation.json" if C<format_suffix> is also enabled)
will execute the operation and return the result.

You can change the documentation suffixes by setting the attributes
L<doc_suffix|/"doc_suffix"> and L<doc_index|/"doc_index">.

=head4 send_files

This feature will enable you to define data service nodes that respond with
the contents of files from disk.  Its primary purpose is to provide access to
the stylesheet used by the documentation pages.  You can use it to provide
access to other files as well.  If you disable this feature but enable the
'documentation' feature, you will need to arrange for the stylesheet to be
provided separately.

=head4 strict_params

If this feature is enabled, then any parameter names that are not recognized
by the ruleset corresponding to the selected data service node will cause a
request to be rejected with a result code of 400 (bad request).  If disabled,
then bad parameter names will generate warnings instead.

=head4 stream_output

If this feature is enabled, then any response body larger than the value of
L<stream_threshold|/"stream_threshold"> will be streamed to the client instead
of being sent in a single chunk.  This feature should be enabled for any
service which can produce large responses, because otherwise the process of
marshalling such responses will take up large amounts of server memory and CPU
time, and may cause excessive paging.

=head3 special_params [req] [inst]

The Web::DataService module can process certain request parameters in special
ways.  Each of these special parameters has an internal name for use in the
data service application code, and an external name which you can set to any
string you choose.  It is this external parameter name which is used by
clients when making requests to the data service.

The value of C<special_params> must be a list of special parameter internal
names.  You can turn off any of these by prefixing the name with C<no_>, and
you can change the external name (i.e. the name actually used in requests) by
adding C<=name>.  The name C<standard> enables the following set of parameters:

    show, limit, offset, header, datainfo, count, vocab, linebreak, save

So the following attribute value would enable the parameters listed above
except for 'datainfo', and would set the external name of the 'header'
parameter to 'head'.

    special_params => 'standard, no_datainfo, header=head'

Once a set of special parameters is chosen, clients of the data service may
include any of them (or none) in any request.  The special parameters are as
follows:

=head4 selector

If enabled, this special parameter is used to select which version of the data
service should respond to the request.  Its external name defaults to C<v>
unless overridden.  If you enable this parameter, then you should give each
data service a different value for the attribute L<key|/"key">.

If you are running multiple versions of your data service from a single
application, or I<if you think you may want to create a second version at some
point>, then you should either enable this parameter from the very beginning
or use a different value of L<path_prefix|/"path_prefix"> for each of your
data services.  One or the other mechanism will ensure that the proper version
of your service is selected to respond to each request.  See the
L<VERSIONING|Web::DataService::Tutorial/VERSIONING> section of
L<Web::DataService::Tutorial> for a more comprehensive discussion.

=head4 format

If enabled, this special parameter is used to select the response format for
the request.  It is not included in the standard set, but you can turn it on
if you prefer your clients to select the response format by means of a
parameter rather than through a suffix on the URL path.  If you do this, then
you must also disable the feature L</"format_suffix">.

=head4 show

If enabled, this special parameter is used to select optional output blocks in
addition to the default output for a particular request.  In this way, clients
can tailor the output of each request to provide just the information they
need and leave out information they do not need.  See the documentation for
<optional_output|/optional_output>.

=head4 limit

If enabled, this special parameter is used to limit the number of result
records returned by a request.  The data service attribute L</default_limit>
can be used to provide a default limit for any request that does not specify
this attribute.  The value of this parameter can be any positive integer, 0,
or the string C<all>.  By using the latter value, a client can ensure that the
entire result set is provided.

This parameter, in combination with C<default_limit>, can be useful for data
services that are able to generate large result sets.  This combination
prevents clients from accidentally sending in request URLs that generate
enormous responses, while allowing the ability to acquire the full results
when necessary.  A client can either use this parameter with a value of C<all>
to obtain the entire result set deliberately with one query, or use it in
conjunction with L</offset> to obtain a large result set using a series of
requests, each of which returns a portion of the desired result.

=head4 offset

If enabled, this parameter indicates that the response should start at the
indicated position in the result set rather than at the beginning.  See also
L</limit>.

=head4 count

If enabled, a true value for this parameter indicates that the response should
include not only the result of the data service operation but also a count of
the number of records found, the number returned, and the elapsed time taken
in executing the operation.  A false value indicates that this information
should not be included.  The attribute L</default_count> specifies whether or
not that information will be included when this parameter is not specified.
This is a L<flag parameter|/"Flag parameters"> (see below).

=head4 datainfo

If enabled, a true value for this parameter indicates that the response should
include not only the result of the data service operation but also a set of
descriptive information about the data.  The attribute L</default_datainfo>
specifies whether or not that information will be included when this parameter
is not specified.  This is a L<flag parameter|/"Flag parameters"> (see
below).

=head4 header

If enabled, a true value for this parameter indicates that the response should
include header material, the contents of which varies according to the output
format and the values of the C<count> and C<datainfo> parameters if these are
enabled.  If false, no header material should be included.  This parameter is
ignored by the JSON output module.  With a text format response (tsv or csv),
if this parameter is provided with a false value then all header material is
suppressed and only the data records (one per line) are returned.  The
attribute L</default_header> specifies whether or not the header will be
included when this paramter is not specified.  This is a L<flag
parameter|/"Flag parameters"> (see below).

=head4 linebreak

If enabled, this parameter can be used to select the linebreak sequence used
with text format responses.  The accepted values are C<cr> for a carriage
return, C<lf> for a linefeed, and C<crlf> for a carriage return/linefeed
combination.  The default external name for this parameter is C<lb>.

=head4 save

If enabled, this parameter can be used to indicate that the response should be
saved to disk rather than displayed in a browser window.  The server will
provide the appropriate headers, but it is up to the web browser or other
client software to decide how to handle them.  If this parameter is provided
with a value other than C<yes>, C<no>, C<on>, C<off>, C<1>, C<0>, C<true>, or
C<false>, then this value will be used as the default filename with the
selected response format appended as a suffix.  You can also use the attribute
L</default_filename> to provide a default in case no filename was specified by
the client.

=head4 vocab

If enabled, this parameter can be used by the client to specify which
vocabulary to use in expressing the result of a data service operation.  The
client can use this to override the default vocabulary for the selected output
format, or to select a vocabulary if the format does not specify a default.
This special parameter is only relevant if you have defined one or more output
vocabularies for this data service.

=head3 foundation_plugin [req] [inst] [mod]

This attribute is not required if one of the known foundation frameworks
(currently only L<Dancer>) is already loaded.  If you put C<use Dancer> in
your main application file before the call to instantiate your data service,
then the plugin L<Web::DataService::Plugin::Dancer> will be loaded
automatically.

The purpose of this plugin module is to interact with the foundation
framework, to carry out tasks such as: receiving HTTP requests, producing HTTP
responses, and reading application configuration information.  The only reason
you might need to specify this attribute explicitly is if you wish to load a
different plugin and override the default choice.  If you do so, and the named
module is not already loaded, it will be automatically loaded.  See
L<Web::DataService::Plugins> for more about plugins.

=head3 templating_plugin [mod]

This attribute may be specified either at instantiation or in the
configuration file.  It must be the name of a Perl module, and will be loaded
at instantiation time if it has not already been loaded.  The purpose of this
plugin module is to interface with a templating engine for the purpose of
producing documentation pages and/or result pages [note: result pages are not
yet implemented].

If this attribute is not specified, and if the module L<Template> has already
been loaded, then the plugin L<Web::DataService::Plugin::TemplateToolkit> will
be loaded automatically.  If no templating plugin is loaded, then
documentation pages cannot be produced.  In that case, the features
'documentation' and 'doc_paths' will be disabled.

=head3 backend_plugin [mod]

This attribute may be specified either at instantiation or in the
configuration file.  It must be the name of a Perl module, and will be
required if not already loaded.  The purpose of this plugin module is to
acquire a connection to a backend database or other system for the purpose of
reading or modifying data in response to data service requests.

If this attribute is not specified, and if F<Dancer/Plugin/Database.pm> has
already been loaded, then the plugin L<Web::DataService::Plugin::Dancer> will
be used in this role.

Unlike the other two plugin attributes, this one is not essential.  Your own
code for implementing the data service operations may simply acquire a backend
database connection in whatever manner is appropriate.

=head3 title [req]

Provides a title by which this data service can be referred to in
documentation pages, etc.  This attribute is required, but may be specified
either at instantiation or in the configuration file.

=head3 version

If specified, the value of this attribute is included in the standard
documentation template as part of the page header.  You can increment this
whenever you make a change to the interface.  The value can be any string,
i.e. "23" or "1.2b5".

=head3 path_prefix

If specfied, the value of this attribute must be a string.  That string will
be removed from the front of each request URL path before the path is matched
to a data service node, and will be prepended to each URL path that is
generated as part of the documentation.

If you are running more than one data service at a time (i.e. multiple
versions) then one good way to arrange them is by setting a different path
prefix for each one.

=head3 key

If specified, the value of this attribute must be a string.  If you are
running multiple data services and do not wish to use different path prefixes
to differentiate them, you can instead enable the special parameter L<selector|/selector>
and set a different value of this attribute for each service.
Generated URLs will include the value of this attribute
as the value of the C<selector> parameter automatically.

=head3 ruleset_prefix

If specified, the value of this attribute must be a string.  It will be
prepended to any auto-generated ruleset names.

=head3 doc_suffix

If specified, the value of this attribute must be a string or quoted regex.
It is only relevant if the feature C<doc_paths> is enabled.  In that case, any
URL path ending in this string will have the string removed, and if the
resulting path matches a data service node then the response will be a
documentation page for that node.  If no node is matched, a 404 error will
result.

If not specified, the default value is '_doc'.

=head3 doc_index

If specified, the value of this attribute must be a string or quoted regex.
It is only relevant if the feature C<doc_paths> is enabled.  In that case, any
URL path ending in '/' followed by this string will have that last part
removed, and if the resulting path matches a data service node then the
response will be a documentation page for that node.  If no node is matched, a
404 error will result.

If not specified, the default value is 'index'.

=head3 doc_template_dir

If specified, the value of this attribute must be a directory path relative to
the application root directory.  Documentation template paths will be looked
up relative to this directory.

If not specified, the default value is F<doc> (relative to the application root
directory).

=head3 doc_output_dir

If specified, the value of this attribute must be a directory path relative to
the application root directory.  Output template paths will be looked
up relative to this directory.

If not specified, then templated output will not be available.  [Note:
templated output is not yet implemented].

=head3 data_source

If specified, the value of this attribute must be a string.  It will be
reported, if requested by the 'datainfo' parameter, in the header of the
response.  Its purpose is to indicate the project, database, etc. from which
the returned data has been drawn.

=head3 data_provider

If specified, the value of this attribute must be a string.  It will be
reported, if requested by the 'datainfo' parameter, in the header of the
response.  Its purpose is to indicate the organization which is providing this
data.

=head3 data_license

If specified, the value of this attribute must be a string.  It will be
reported, if requested by the 'datainfo' parameter, in the header of the
response.  Its purpose is to indicate the name of the license under which this
data is being made available.

=head3 license_url

If specified, the value of this attribute must be a valid URL.  It will be
reported, if requested by the 'datainfo' parameter, in the header of the
response.  Its purpose is provide a link by which more information about the
license terms may be found.

=head3 admin_name

If specified, the value of this attribute will be reported in the standard
documentation footer as the "contact person" to whom bug reports, feedback, or other
queries about this service should be addressed.

=head3 admin_email

If specified, the value of this attribute will be reported in the standard
documentation footer as the "contact address" to which bug reports, feedback, or other
queries about this service should be addressed.

=head2 Node definitions

Data service nodes are the fundamental organizing elements of a data service
definition under this framework.  You define them by calling the method
C<define_node> on a data service instance.  These nodes correspond to the
various resources provided by the data service.  Any node for which the
attributes C<role> and C<method> are both defined will correspond to a data
service operation (we call these "operation nodes") while other nodes may
correspond to documentation pages or files.

The only required attribute for a node is C<path>, which provides a unique
key.  Most attributes of data service nodes are inherited path-wise.  That is,
a node with path "foo/bar" will inherit from the node with path "foo" any
attributes whose values are not explicitly specified in its definition.  The
node with path "/" functions as the root, and its attribute values provide
defaults for all of the other nodes.  Any node attribute can be explicitly
disabled for a particular node by specifying its value as the empty string.
The few attributes that are not inherited will be noted below.

Most of the attributes listed here may also be specified in the application
configuration file, in the same manner as data service attributes.  In that case,
they will provide default values for the nodes.  Attributes for which you wish
to give the same value to all (or most) nodes can be conveniently specified in
this way, or you can specify them when defining the root node "/".  You can always
override them at a lower level of the node hierarchy, if you wish.

The node attributes do not have accessor methods.  Rather, you can retrieve
the value of any node attribute by using the C<node_attr> method of the data
service instance or of a request instance:

    # either of the following:
    
    $attribute_value = $ds->node_attr($path, $attr_name);
    $attribute_value = $request->node_attr($attr_name);

For example, each operation subroutine is called as a method of a request
object.  This request object itself has many attributes (with accessors) that
are derived from the data service node that matches the request.  However, you
can if necessary query for arbitrary node attributes:

    sub my_operation {
        my ($request) = @_;
        my $default_limit = $request->node_attr('default_limit');
        ...

=head2 Node attributes

With the exception of C<path>, each of these attributes is optional.

=head3 path

This attribute is required for every node, and must be unique among the nodes
defined for this data service.  For each incoming request, the URL path and
parameters are processed in various ways (depending upon which data service
features and special parameters have been enabled) to extract a path which is
compared to the set of defined nodes.  If one matches, then the attributes of
that node will be used to generate the appropriate response.  Otherwise, a 404
error ("not found") will be returned to the client.

=head3 disabled

If this attribute is given a true value, then it will never match any request.
Any request corresponding to this node's path (whether it is an operation
request or a documentation request) will return a 404 error.  The attribute is
inherited, so any children of this node will be likewise disabled.  You can
use this to define placeholder nodes for functionality to be added later, or
to remove existing functions from your application and leave the code in place
to be re-activated later.

=head3 undocumented

If this attribute is given a true value, then any request asking for
documentation about this node will return a 404 error.  The node will still be
active for requests that ask for its operation.  This allows you to provide
undocumented data service operations, while explicitly noting that fact in
your code.

=head3 title

The value of this attribute must be a string, which will be used as the title
for any documentation generated about the node.  If not specified, the node
path will be used instead.  This attribute is B<not inherited>.  Best practice
is to define a specific and informative title for each node.

=head3 doc_string

You can set this attribute either directly or by including one or more
documentation strings after the node attribute hash in the call to
C<define_node>.  The default documentation templates use this value as the
main description on each documentation page.  If you wish to use a longer
description than can be easily conveyed in a call to C<define_node>, then
create a specific documentation template for this node.

=head3 usage

The value of this attribute must be either a hashref or an array of hashrefs.
Its purpose is to generate a list of example URLs as part of the node
documentation.  Each hash should have at least one of the following keys:

=over

=item format

This specifies the response format that the example URL will request.  If not
specified, the default format (if any) will be used.

=item params

This should either be an array of URL parameters or a string.  For example, 
C<[ 'state=ak', 'count' ]> or C<'state=ak&count'>.

=item fragment

This should specify a URL fragment (without the C<#>) to be added on the end.

=back

Any invalid items will be simply ignored.  If no valid items are found, the
section will be omitted completely.

=head3 method

A node that has both this attribute and the attribute L</role> is considered
to be an "operation node".  The attribute value must be the name of a
subroutine (not a code reference) in the package specified by C<role>.  An
"operation request" that matches this node will result in the creation of a
"request object" whose class contains the appropriate role, followed by a
method call to the specified subroutine.

=head3 role

The value of this attribute must be the name of a L<Moo> L<Role|Moo::Role>
defined by an already-loaded package.  Any operation methods defined for this
node and/or its children must occur in that package.  All operation nodes must
either have this attribute specified explicitly or inherit its value from a
parent node.

=head3 arg

This attribute is only relevant for operation nodes.  If specified, its
value will be provided as an argument when the specified method is called
to carry out the operation.  By means of this attribute, you can arrange for
more than one node to call the same method, and have that method behave
differently depending upon which argument it receives.

=head3 ruleset

This attribute is only relevant for operation nodes.  Its value must be the
name of a ruleset defined for this data service instance.  This ruleset will
be automatically used to validate the URL parameters for any request that
matches this node, and will also be used in the process of generating
documentation about the node.

If the attribute is not specified, a ruleset name will be automatically
generated by taking the node path, changing any slashes into colons, and
adding the ruleset prefix (if any has been defined for this data service).  If
the resulting name corresponds to a defined ruleset, that ruleset will be
used.  You will probably find it convenient to use these auto-generated
ruleset names in most cases, and will rarely need to specify this attribute.

=head3 output

This attribute is only relevant for operation nodes.  Its value must be the
name of an output block defined for this data service, or the names of more
then one output block separated by commas and optional whitespace.  For
example:

    output => 'block1, block2'

This block or blocks will make up the fixed output of this node's operation.

=head3 output_label

The value attribute will be used to label the fixed output blocks in the
generated documentation for this node.  Its value must be a string.  If not
specified, it defaults to C<basic>.

=head3 optional_output

If specified, the value of this attribute must be the name of a single output
map (in other words, a set) defined for this data service.  This will be used,
in conjunction with the value of the special parameter C<show>, to select
additional output blocks to be included in a response.  This attribute is
useless unless the special parameter C<show> is enabled, and will only be used
when responding to requests that include a value for that parameter.

=head3 file_path

If this attribute is specified, then this node will be a "file node".  The
value must be a filename relative to the "public file" directory established
by the foundation framework (for L<Dancer>, this is the directory "public"
under the application root).  A request that exactly matches this node will
return the contents of this file, a 404 error if the file does not exist, or a
500 error if it exists but is not readable.  It is an error to specify both
C<file_path> and C<file_dir> for a single node, or to specify either of them
along with C<method>.

=head3 file_dir

If this attribute is specified, then this node will be a "file node".  The
value must be a directory path relative to the "public file" directory (see
L</file_dir>).  A request whose path exactly matches this node will result in
a 404 error, but one whose path has this node's path as a prefix will look up
the remainder of the path in this directory.  If the indicated file exists and
is readable, its contents will be returned.  If it exists but is not readable,
a 500 error will be returned.  Otherewise, a 404 error results.

=head3 public_access

If this attribute is given a true value, then all response messages generated
in association with this node will have the CORS header
"Access-control-allow-origin" set to "*".  Until we provide better means of
controlling the CORS header in a later version of this framework, we suggest
that you always set this to true for the root node.

=head3 default_format

The value of this attribute must be the name of one of the formats defined for
this data service.  If no response format can be determined from the request URL
and/or parameters, then the specified format will be used for any operation
request matching this node.  If the data service will only be returning data
in a single format, then you should set the value of this attribute in the
root node to the name of that format.

=head3 default_limit

The value of this attribute will put a limit on the size of the result set for
all operation requests matching this node, unless overridden by the special
parameter L</limit>.  The purpose of this attribute is to prevent
badly-composed requests from accidentally generating an enormous result set.
A client can always include C<limit=all> in the request parameters to retrieve
the full result set.  However, provided that clients leave that parameter off
unless needed, this attribute provides a backstop.  The value of this
attribute must be a positive integer.  Unless you want a hard limit that
clients cannot override, you should make sure that the special parameter
C<limit> is enabled if you use this attribute (it is included in the standard
set).

=head3 default_header

By default, text format output includes a header unless the client explicitly
turns it off by including C<header=no> in the request parameters.  If this
parameter is set to a B<false> value, then no header will be provided for text
format responses matching this node unless explicitly requested by the client
using C<header=yes>.  Unless you want to disable headers entirely, you should
make sure that the special parameter C<header> is enabled if you use this
attribute (it is included in the standard set).

=head3 default_datainfo

By default, information about the dataset is included in a response only if
the client requests it by including C<datainfo=yes> in the request parameters.
If this attribute is set to a true value, then this information will be
included by default for all operation requests matching this node unless the
client specifies C<datainfo=no> (assuming that the special parameter
C<datainfo> is active).  If you want clients to have control over whether or
not this information is provided, you should make sure that the special
parameter C<datainfo> is enabled (it is included in the standard set).

=head3 default_count

By default, a count of the number of records found and returned is included in
a response only if the client requests it by including C<count=yes> in the
request parameters.  If this attribute is set to a true value, then this
information will be included by default for all operation requests matching
this node unless the client specifies C<count=no>.  If you want clients to
have control over whether or not this information is provided, you should make
sure that the special parameter C<count> is enabled (it is included in the
standard set).

=head3 default_linebreak

The value of this attribute must be either 'crlf', 'cr', or 'lf'.  If not
specified, it defaults to 'crlf'.  The specified character sequence will be
used to separate the lines of any text format output from requests that
match this node, unless overridden by the special parameter C<linebreak>.

=head3 default_save_filename

The value of this attribute will used for the 'content-disposition' header of
the response message for requests matching this node, if the special parameter
C<save> is given with a basic 'true' value and not a filename.  The name of
the requested response format will automatically be appended as a suffix, so no
suffix should be included in the attribute value.  For requests given through
a web browser, most browsers will offer to save the file under this name.

=head3 stream_threshold

The value of this attribute must be a positive integer.  It is only relevant
if the feature C<stream_data> is enabled for this data service.  Any response
whose length exceeds the value of this attribute will be streamed to the
client instead of sent as a single message.  This feature is a good idea to
enable for any service that can produce responses of more than a few hundred
kilobytes.  If the feature is enabled but this attribute is not specified, it
defaults to 100Kb.

=head3 allow_method

This is a set-valued attribute.  The individual values must be HTTP method
types (i.e. GET, POST), specifying which HTTP methods are valid for requests
matching this node.  If C<GET> is allowed, then C<HEAD> is allowed
automatically as well.  If not specified, then the methods C<GET> and C<HEAD>
are allowed.

=head3 allow_format

This is a set-valued attribute.  The individual values must be the names of
response formats defined for this data service, specifying which ones are valid
for requests matching this node.  If not specified, then all defined formats
are allowed.

=head3 allow_vocab

This is a set-valued attribute.  The individual values must be the names of
vocabularies defined for this data service, specifying which ones are valid
for requests matching this node.  If not specified, then all defined
vocabularies are allowed.

=head3 doc_template

The value of this attribute must be a file pathname relative to the
L<documentation template directory|/doc_template_dir>.  The specified template
file will be used to respond to any documentation requests matching this node.
If not specified, then an automatic path will be constructed by starting with
the node path and adding "_doc" followed by the filename suffix specified by
the templating plugin.  If no file is found under that name, then the node
path followed by "/index" and the same suffix is tried.  You will probably
find it easiest to name your documentation files according to one of these two
patterns, so that you will rarely if ever need to specify a value for this
attribute.

=head3 doc_default_op_template

When a request for documentation matches this node, if the template specified
by the L</doc_template> attribute is not found, and if the automatic paths are
not found either, then the value of this attribute is tried next if this is an
operation node.  If specified, the attribute value must be a file pathname
relative to the L<documentation template directory|/doc_template_dir>.  The
contents of the template should be a generic "operation documentation"
template that can be filled in from the node attributes such as
L</doc_string>.  In most cases, you will want to specify this attribute at
the root node so that its value will be inherited by all of the other nodes.

=head3 doc_default_template

When a request for documentation matches this node, if none of the other
template paths correspond to an actual template file on disk, then the value
of this attribute will be tried as a final default.  The contents of this
template might say something like "no documentation can be found".  If not
specified, the default value is 'doc_not_found' followed by the appropriate
suffix for the selected templating engine (i.e. '.tt' for Template Toolkit).

=head3 doc_defs

If specified, the value of this attribute must be a file path relative to the
L<documentation template directory|/doc_template_dir>.  This file will be
evaluated before each documentation template is rendered.  Its purpose is to
define standard elements for use by the documentation template, the header,
and the footer.  You may set this to the empty string if you do not wish a
definition file to be used.

If not specified, the default value is 'doc_defs' followed by the appropriate
suffix for the selected templating engine (i.e. '.tt' for Template Toolkit).
In most cases, you will want to either use the default or specify this
attribute at the root node.

=head3 doc_header

If specified, the value of this attribute must be a file path relative to the
L<documentation template directory|/doc_template_dir>.  This file will be
evaluated before each documentation template is rendered, but after the file
specified by L</doc_defs>.  Its purpose is to generate a header for the
documentation pages.  You may set this to the empty string if you do not wish
a header to be applied to the documentation pages.

If not specified, the default value is 'doc_header' followed by the
appropriate suffix for the selected templating engine (i.e. '.tt' for Template
Toolkit).  In most cases, you will want to either use the default or specify
this attribute at the root node.

=head3 doc_footer

If specified, the value of this attribute must be a file path relative to the
L<documentation template directory|/doc_template_dir>.  This file will be
evaluated after each documentation template is rendered.  Its purpose is to
generate a footer for the documentation pages.  You may set this to the empty
string if you do not wish a footer to be applied to the documentation pages.

If not specified, the default value is 'doc_footer' followed by the
appropriate suffix for the selected templating engine (i.e. '.tt' for Template
Toolkit).  In most cases, you will want to either use the default or specify this
attribute at the root node.

=head3 doc_stylesheet

If specified, the value of this attribute must be an absolute or relative URL
(I<not a file path>) which should refer to a stylesheet file to go with the
documentation pages.  If you wish the data service to provide this file, you
will need to define a data service node with one of the attributes C<file_dir>
or C<file_path> (and enable the C<send_files> feature).  Typically, this node
should have the path "css" or "css/dsdoc.css", and its attribute should point
to a similarly-named subdirectory of the public file directory set up by the
foundation framework ("public" in the case of L<Dancer>).

If not specified, the default value is a URL generated using the appropriate
pattern for this data service for the node path "/css/dsdoc.css".  The default
installation of this framework includes an appropriate CSS file under that
name, which you can edit however you choose.

=head2 Response format definitions

Each data service must define one or more response formats.  These are defined
using the C<define_format> method of the data service object.  This must be be
done at data service startup time, before any nodes are defined (so that the
'default_format' and 'allow_format' node attributes can be interpreted
properly).  Each format definition configures one of the available
serialization modules.

=head3 Predefined formats

The format names listed below are predefined by Web::DataService and can be
activated simply by specifying a hashref with the appropriate C<name>
attribute.  For example, the following call will enable the formats 'json' and
'txt' with all of their default attribute values and documentation strings.

    $ds->define_format(
        { name => 'json' },
        { name => 'txt' });

You can override any of these attribute values and documentation strings by
specifying them explicitly.  The example code directory contains documentation
files for each of these formats, which you can copy into your own application
directory and modify as you see fit.  However, you must explicitly define the
corresponding data service nodes yourself or else the documentation pages will
not be available.  The corresponding call for this example would be:

    $ds->define_node(
	{ path => 'formats',
	  title => 'Response formats' },
	{ path => 'formats/json',
	  title => 'JSON format' },
	{ path => 'formats/txt',
	  title => 'Plain text format' });

See the next section for descriptions of the various attributes.

=head4 json

This format serializes operation results using
L<JSON|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON> (JavaScript Object Notation).  It
sets the content type of the response to "application/json", and its default
documentation node is "formats/json".  The module used is
L<Web::DataService::Plugins::JSON>.

=head4 txt

This format serializes operation results as lines of L<comma-separated
values|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comma-separated_values> separated by the
specified L<linebreak sequence|/default_linebreak>.  Its content type is
"text/plain", and its default documentation node is "formats/txt".  The module
used is L<Web::DataService::Plugins::Text>.

=head4 csv

This format is identical to L</txt>, except that it sets the content
type of the response to "text/csv".

=head4 tsv

This format serializes operation results as lines of L<tab-separated
values|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tab-separated_values> separated by the
specified L<linebreak sequence|/default_linebreak>.  Its content type is
"text/tab-separated-values", and its default documentation node is
"formats/txt".  The module used is L<Web::DataService::Plugins::Text>.

=head2 Response format attributes

With the exception of C<name>, each of these attributes is optional for
predefined formats.  Those which are required for custom (i.e. not predefined)
formats are noted below.

=head3 name

Each format defined for a given data service must have a unique name.  This
name can be used as the value of the node attributes C<allow_format> and
C<default_format>, and is matched either to the URL path suffix or to the
value of the special parameter L</format> depending upon which data service
features are enabled.  This attribute is required for all format definitions.

=head3 title

The value of this attribute is used as the format's title in all
generated documentation.  It defaults to the name.

=head3 content_type

The value of this attribute specifies the HTTP content type that will be
reported in the response message.  It is required for all custom format
definitions.

=head3 module

The value of this attribute must be the name of a Perl module implementing
this format.  This module will be automatically loaded via C<require>.  You
must specify this attribute when defining a custom format, and then include
a module with the corresponding name in the appropriate library directory.

=head3 doc_node

The value of this attribute specifies the path of a data service node which
will provide documentation about this format.  You must define the node with a
separate call to C<define_node>.

=head3 doc_string

You can set this attribute either directly or by including one or more
documentation strings after each format definition hash in the call to
C<define_format>.  This value will be used in any auto-generated format lists
in the documentation pages.

=head3 default_vocab

The value of this attribute must be the name of an already-defined
L<vocabulary|Vocabulary definitions>.  This vocabulary will be used when
rendering responses in this format, unless overridden by the special parameter
C<vocab>.  It defaults to 'default', which simply uses the underlying field
names from the backend data store.

=head3 uses_header

The special parameter C<header> will only be enabled if at least one output
format uses it.  If you are defining a custom format that includes an optional
header, you should give this attribute a true value.  All of the Text builtin
formats set this by default.

=head3 disabled

If this attribute is given a true value, the format definition will be ignored
(except that no other format may be defined with the same name).

=head3 undocumented

If this attribute is given a true value, the format will be available to be
selected in the usual way, but it will never appear in any auto-generated
documentation list.

=head2 Vocabulary definitions

Each data service may define one or more output vocabularies.  These are
defined using the C<define_vocab> method of the data service object.  This
must be be done at data service startup time, before any formats are defined
(so that the 'default_vocab' format attribute can be interpreted properly).

A vocabulary named 'default' is always available.  You do not need to call
C<define_vocab> to make it active, unlike with the predefined formats discussed
above.  This vocabulary expresses results using the underlying field names
used by the backend data store.  If you do not wish this vocabulary to be
available for selection, you can explicitly disable it as follows:

    $ds->define_vocab({ name => 'default', disabled => 1 });

You make use of these vocabularies when defining output blocks using the
C<define_block> method.  For example, if you have defined a vocabulary named
"foo", then any output fields you subsequently define may contain the
attribute "foo_name" whose value will be used as the field name in any output
rendered with vocabulary "foo".  If no such attribute is specified, then that
field will be omitted.  You can also include processing rules with an
"if_vocab" value of "foo", which will be activated only when this vocabulary
is selected.  In this way, you can transform both the field names and values
as appropriate for this vocabulary, and skip output values that cannot be
expressed in that vocabulary.

=head2 Vocabulary attributes

With the exception of C<name>, each of these attributes is optional.  

=head3 name

Each vocabulary defined for a given data service must have a unique name.
This name can be used as the value of the format attribute C<default_vocab>,
and the processing rule attributes C<if_vocab> and C<not_vocab>.

In addition, suppose you have defined a vocabulary named "foo".  You can then
include the attribute C<foo_name> in any of your field definitions.

=head3 title

The value of this attribute is used as the vocabulary's title in documentation
pages.  It defaults to the name.

=head3 doc_node

The value of this attribute specifies the path of a data service node which
will provide documentation about this vocabulary.  You must define the node with a
separate call to C<define_node>.

=head3 use_field_names

If this attribute is given a true value, then the underlying field names used
by the backend data store will be used by this vocabulary.  It is
automatically set to true for the predefined vocabulary 'default'.

=head3 disposition

If this attribute is given the value 'attachment', then any response generated
with this format will be returned with a "content-disposition" header
indicating that it should be saved to disk.  Unless the special parameter
"save" is active and the request includes this parameter with a false value,
which overrides the output format disposition.

=head3 doc_string

You can set this attribute either directly or by including one or more
documentation strings after the format attribute hash in the call to
C<define_format>.  This value will be used in any auto-generated vocabulary
lists in the documentation pages.

=head3 disabled

If this attribute is given a true value, the vocabulary definition will be ignored
(except that no other vocabulary may be defined with the same name).

=head3 undocumented

If this attribute is given a true value, the vocabulary will be available to
be selected in the usual way, but it will never appear in any auto-generated
documentation list.

=head2 Set definitions

Each data service may define one or more sets of elements, which can be used
to specify parameter values or output field values, or establish a mapping
from one set of values to another.  These are defined using the C<define_set>
method of the data service object, or its alias C<define_output_map>.

The first argument to C<define_set> (or C<define_output_map>) must be a string
that provides the name of the set.  This must be unique among all of the sets
defined for this data service.  The remaining arguments must be either
hashrefs or strings: the hashrefs define the elements of the set, and the
strings provide documentation.  For example:

    $ds->define_set('size_values',
        { value => 'small' }, "Selects only small items",
        { value => 'medium' }, "Selects only medium items",
        { value => 'large' }, "Selects only large items");

=head2 Set element attributes

Each element in a set definition must be a hashref specifying one or more of
the following attributes.  With the exception of C<value>, each of these is
optional.

=head3 value

This attribute is required for each element.  Its value must be a string, and
must be unique within the set.  This string will be included in the list of
values that make up the set.

=head3 maps_to

The value of this attribute must be a string.  This attribute is used when
defining output maps.  You can also use it in order to establish a mapping
from one set of values to another, for example to convert output field values
from one vocabulary to another.

=head3 disabled

If this attribute is given a true value, then the element definition in which
it occurs is completely ignored.

=head3 undocumented

If this attribute is given a true value, then the element is accepted as a
valid value for the set in which it is defined.  However, it will not appear
in any auto-generated documentation about the set.

=head2 Output block definitions

Each data service may define one or more groups of output elements, called
"output blocks".  These are defined by calling the C<define_block> method of
the data service object.  These output elements specify which data fields
should be included in the result, how they should be labeled, and how they
should be processed.

The first argument to C<define_block> must be a string that provides the name
of the output block.  This must be unique among all of the output blocks
defined for this data service.  The remaining elements must be either hashrefs
or strings: the hashrefs define the individual elements of the block, and the
strings provide documentation.  For example:

    $ds->define_block( 'basic' =>
	{ output => 'name' },
	    "The name of the state",
	{ output => 'abbrev' },
	    "The standard abbreviation for the state",
	{ output => 'region' },
	    "The region of the country in which the state is located",
	{ output => 'pop2010' },
	    "The population of the state in 2010");

This call defines an output block called 'basic', with four elements.  Each of
these elements represent output fields.

When a data service request is handled, the data service operation method is
expected to construct and execute the appropriate query and then pass back a
either a list of output records (as a listref whose elements are hashes) or a
DBI statement handle from which the output records can be retrieved.  Each of
the output records will included in the data service result according to the
list of output blocks that have been selected for this request, as interpreted
by the serialization routine corresponding to the selected output format.

There are four categories of output elements, listed below.  Each category is
defined by the presence of a hash key corresponding to the element type.  Each
element must contain exactly one of these keys, or else an error will be
thrown at startup time.

=over

=item output

An "output" element specifies a single data field to be included in a data
service result.  The value of the key C<output> gives the internal name of
this field, generally, the name by which the field is known to the backend
data store.  Other keys may be used to specify the name under which this
field will be included in the result, and yet other keys can be used to
specify conditions under which this it will or will not be included in the
result.  This is the only kind of element that is required in order to produce
data service output; the others are there for the convenience of the
application programmer.

=item set

A "process" element indicates a processing step to be carried out on the data
before it is included in the result.  The value of the key C<set> specifies
which field's value is to be altered.

=item select

A "select" element specifies a list of strings that can be retrieved later by
the various data service operation methods and used to construct queries on
the backend data store.  Use of this element is optional.  The value of the
key C<select> must be an arrayref whose elements are strings that contain
field specifications, e.g. for an SQL SELECT statement.  These should include
all of the fields that are necessary in order to generate the output of this
block.  A data service operation method can then call one of the methods
C<select_list>, C<select_hash> or C<select_string> on the request object in
order to retrieve the entire set of fields (with duplicates removed) so as to
satisfy all of the output blocks that are being used by this particular
request.  Other keys can be used to specify auxiliary information such as SQL
table names.

=item include

An "include" element can be used to include the definition of one block inside
another.  The value of the key C<include> must be the name of another output
block defined for this data service; the "include" element will be replaced by
a list of all of the elements from the named block.

=back

It is important to note that two lists of elements are generated for each
request: a list of process ("set") elements, and a list of output elements.
These are taken from the fixed output block(s) first, and then from any
optional blocks in the order they were specified (not in the order they were
defined!)  All of the process elements are applied first, and then the
output list is used to determine the serialized output for the record.

=head2 Output block attributes

The attributes that can be used to configure output are listed in the
following sections, one section for each element type.

=head3 output elements

An output element is indicated by the presence of the key C<output>.  For
example:

    { output => 'foo', dedup => 'bar', long_name => 'foodlerizer' }

This particular element declares that each output record will include the data
field 'foo', but only if its value differs from the value of the field 'bar'.
If the vocabulary 'long' has been selected for this request, then the field
will be labeled 'foodlerizer' in the generated output.  Otherwise, the label
will default to the field name ('foo').

You may use any of the following attributes in specifying output elements.
All of the attributes except for 'output' are optional.  In the following
subsections, "this element" refers to the output element currently being
specified.

=head4 output

This attribute is required, and we recommend that you always specify it first
in order to make clear the element type.  The data for this element will be
derived from each output record by using the value of this attribute as a hash
key.

=head4 name

The value of this attribute must be a string.  This value will be used as the
label for this element in the generated result, unless a vocabulary-specific
name is selected.  If this attribute is not specified, then the label will
default to the value of C<output>.

=head4 'vocab'_name

An attribute of this form specifies the label which will be used for this
element in the generated result if the corresponding vocabulary is selected.
For example, an attribute called C<dwc_name> would be used whenever the
vocabulary C<dwc> is selected for a request.  If no name corresponds to the
selected vocabulary, then the field will be left out of the response.

=head4 value

The value of this attribute must be a string.  This value will be output as
the value of this element in every record, regardless of any value retrieved
from the backend data store.  The purpose of this attribute is to generate
constant-valued fields such as record type indicators.

=head4 'vocab'_value

An attribute of this form specifies the value to be used for this element if the
corresponding vocabulary is selected.  The purpose of such attributes it to
generate constant-valued fields whose value is appropriate to the specified
vocabulary.  See L<< /"'vocab'_name" >>.

=head4 dedup

The value of this attribute must be the name of another data field, which need
not correspond to any output element.  If the value of the data field named by
C<output> is identical to the value of the field named by C<dedup>, then this
output element will be ignored.  You can use this if you wish to prevent two
different fields with the same value from appearing in a single output
record. This is evaluated independently for each record that is output.

=head4 sub_record

The value of this attribute must be the name of another output block defined
for this data service.  This attribute is only used if the data value is
itself a hashref, and if the selected output format can express hierarchical
data (e.g. JSON).  In that case, the hashref will be interpreted as a
sub-record according to the specified block.

=head4 always

If this attribute is given a true value, then this element will always be
included in the output even if its value is undefined.  By default, the JSON
format omits from each record any fields whose values are undefined.

=head4 if_field

The value of this attribute must be the name of another data field, which need
not correspond to any output element.  If the named field has an undefined
value, then this output element will be ignored for this record.  You can use
this to output field B only in records where field A has a value.  This
attribute is evaluated independently for each record that is output.

=head4 not_field

This attribute is the opposite of L</if_field>.  If the named field has a
defined value, then this output element will be ignored.  You can use this
to output field B only for those records in which field A does not have a
value.

=head4 if_vocab

The value of this attribute must be a string containing the names of one or
more vocabularies (separated by commas and optional whitespace) that have been
defined for this data service.  This output element will only be included in
the result if one of the specified vocabularies was selected for the request.
In contrast to C<if_field>, this attribute is evaluated once for each request
at the beginning of processing.

=head4 not_vocab

Thie attribute is the opposite of L</if_vocab>.  This element will only be
included in the result if the selected vocabulary is not one of those
specified.

=head4 if_format

The value of this attribute must be a string containing the names of one or
more output formats (separated by commas and optional whitespace) that have
been defined for this data service.  This element will only be included in the
result if the selected output format is one of these.  This attribute is
evaluated once for each request at the beginning of processing.

=head4 not_format

This attribute is the opposite of L</if_format>.  This element will not be
included in the result if the selected output format is one of these.

=head4 if_block

The value of this attribute must be a string containing the names and/or keys
of one or more output blocks (separated by commas and optional whitespace)
that have been defined for this data service.  This element will only be
included in the result if at least one of those blocks is included.  This
attribute is evaluated once for each request at the beginning of processing.

=head4 not_block

This attribute is the oppositve of L</if_block>.  This element will not be
included in the result if any of the named blocks is.

=head4 text_join

This attribute is only used when the selected output format is a text-based
one such as CSV.  Its value must be a string.  When generating the output for
any record where the value of this element's data field is an array, the
values will be joined together using the specified string.  If this attribute
is not specified, it defaults to ", ".

=head4 xml_join

This attribute is similar to L</text_join>, and is used when the selected
output format is XML.

=head4 show_as_list

This attribute is only used when the selected output format is JSON.  If it is
given a true value, then this output element will be represented as an array
even if the data field contains a single value.

=head4 doc_string

You can set this attribute either directly or by including one or more
documentation strings after the element-definition hash in the call to
C<define_block>.  This value will be used to auto-generate documentation for
the output of the various data service operations.

=head4 undocumented

If this attribute is given a true value, then this element will be left out of
any auto-generated documentation.  It will still appear in data operation
results.

=head3 process element attributes

An process element is indicated by the presence of the key C<set>.  For
example:

    { set => 'foo', from => 'bar', code => 'translate' }

This particular element causes the following action to happen before each
record is output: the method C<translate> of the request object is called and
is passed the value of the data field C<bar>.  The result is stored in the
data field C<foo>, which need not have had any value until then.

You may use any of the following attributes in specifying output elements.
The attribute C<set> specifies the target of the operation, while one of the
attributes C<from> or C<from_each> specifies the source.  If neither of these
attributes is specified, then the target field is processed in place.  The
source and/or target may be specified as '*', meaning the entire record.

All attributes except for 'set' are optional.  A single process element may
have at most one of the attributes C<code>, C<lookup>, C<split> and C<join>.

=head4 set

This attribute is required, and we recommend that you always specify it first
in order to make clear the element type.  If the value is any non-empty string
other than '*', the data field named by this string will used as the target
of this processing step.  If the value is '*', then no target is set.  This
special value is useful mainly in conjunction with the attribute C<code>,
causing the specified subroutine to be passed a reference to the record as a
whole.  It can then modify the record arbitrarily.

=head4 from

The value of this attribute must be a non-empty string.  The value of the data
field named by this string will be used as the "source value" for this
processing step.  If the value is '*', then the entire record will be passed
as the "source value".

=head4 from_each

The value of this attribute must be a non-empty string.  All values stored in
the field named by this string will be used as source values for this
processing step: if the value is an array, the step will be carried out on
each value in turn.  If the value is a scalar, it will be carried out on that
value.  If a single value results, the target field will be set to that
value. If more than one value results, the target field will be set to an
arrayref whose contents are the result values.  If no values result, the
target field will be set to C<undef>.  This attribute is not valid if the
target is '*'.

=head4 code

The value of this attribute must either be the name of a request method
(almost always one which you have written as part of a data service operation
role) or a code reference.  It will be called with the request object as the
first argument, and the source value as the second.  The source value will a
reference to the entire record if C<< set => '*' >> or C<< from => '*' >> is
also specified.  The result of this subroutine call will be stored in the
target field, unless the target is '*'.

You can use this powerful functionality to arbitrarily alter the data records
before they are output.

=head4 lookup

The value of this attribute must be a hashref.  The source value will be
looked up in this hashref, and the resulting value stored in the target
field. If the source value does not occur as a hash key, and the attribute
L</default> was also specified, its value will be used instead.  This
attribute is not valid if either the source or the target is '*'.

=head4 default

The value of this attribute will be used as the result of this processing step
if the source value does not appear in the hashref specified by L</lookup>.

=head4 split

The source value will be L<split|perlfunc/split> according to the value of
this attribute, and the target will be set to the resulting list of values.
You can use this with either C<from> or C<from_each>; in the latter case all
of the resulting lists are concatenated together.  This attribute is not valid if
either the source or the target is '*'.

=head4 join

The source value(s) will be L<joined|perlfunc/join> together using the value
of this attribute, and the target will be set to the resulting string.  This
attribute is only valid in conjunction with C<from>, and is not valid if
either the source or the target is '*'.

=head4 always

If this attribute is given a true value, then the processing step will be
carried out whether or not the source value is defined.  By default, this step
is skipped if the source value is not defined.

=head4 if_field

This step will only be carried out if the field named by this attribute has a
defined value.  This attribute only makes sense if it specifies a field other
than the source field, because by default a processing step is skipped if its
source field is undefined.  This attribute is evaluated once for each record.

=head4 not_field

This step will only be carried out if the field named by this attribute does
not have a defined value.  This is the opposite to C<if_field>, and is also
evaluated once for each record.

=head4 if_vocab

The value of this attribute must be a string containing the names of one or
more vocabularies (separated by commas and optional whitespace) that have been
defined for this data service.  This processing step will only be carried out
if one of the specified vocabularies was selected for the request.  In
contrast to C<if_field>, this attribute is evaluated once for each request at
the beginning of processing.

=head4 not_vocab

Thie attribute is the opposite of L</if_vocab>.  This processing step will
only be carried out if the selected vocabulary is not one of those specified.

=head4 if_format

The value of this attribute must be a string containing the names of one or
more output formats (separated by commas and optional whitespace) that have
been defined for this data service.  This processing step will only be carried
out if one of the specified formats was selected for the request.  This
attribute is evaluated once for each request at the beginning of processing.

=head4 not_format

Thie attribute is the opposite of L</if_format>.  This processing step will
only be carried out if the selected format is not one of those specified.

=head4 if_block

The value of this attribute must be a string containing the names of one or
more output blocks (separated by commas and optional whitespace) that have
been defined for this data service.  This processing step will only be carried
out if one of the specified blocks is included in the request.  This
attribute is evaluated once for each request at the beginning of processing.

=head4 not_block

Thie attribute is the opposite of L</if_block>.  This processing step will
only be carried out if any of the named blocks is included in the request.

=head3 select element attributes

A select element is indicated by the presence of the key C<select>.  For
example:

    { select => 'a.foo, b.bar', tables => 'a, b' }

This element adds the values 'a.foo' and 'b.bar' to the "select list" and 'a'
and 'b' to the "tables list".  The data service operation methods that you
write can then query the request object to obtain either a list or a hash of
the unique select values and a hash of the unique table values.

This element was designed with SQL in mind, but you can use it in any way that
makes sense in constructing queries for the backend data system regardless of
whether or not it is based on SQL.  The idea is that your operation methods
can use this mechanism to get a list of the fields and tables (or equivalent
constructs) necessary for satisfying all of the output blocks that have been
selected for this particular query.  In this way, a single operation method
can satisfy a wide variety of requests.

You can use any of the following attributes in defining a select element:

=head4 select

This attribute is required, and we recommend that you always specify it first
in order to make clear the element type.  The value can be either a string or
an array of strings.  In the first case, it will be split on the pattern
C<q{\s*,\s*}>.

From your data service operation subroutines, you can call any of the relevant
methods of the request object (C<select_list>, C<select_string>,
C<select_hash>) to retrieve the list of all the C<select> values from all of
the output blocks selected for this request, with duplicates removed.

=head4 tables

This attribute is optional.  The value can either be a string or an array of
strings, and is treated exactly like the value of C<select> except that you
retrieve the values by calling C<tables_hash>.  In most cases, it will make
sense to list all of the unique tables (or equivalent constructs, depending
upon the backend data system you are using) used by the elements listed in the
value of the attribute C<select>.

=head3 include element attributes

An include element is indicated by the presence of the attribute C<include>,
which must be the only attribute in this element definition.  For example:

    { include => 'other_block' }

This definition specifies that all of the elements defined for 'other_block'
should be included in the block currently being defined.  The value of this
attribute must be either a block name or else a value from the output map
specified by the attribute "optional_output" from the data service node
corresponding to this request.  In other words, you can specify which block to
include either by its internal name or by the name that clients use to refer
to it.

If the name does not correspond to any defined block, then this element is
ignored and a warning is generated in the error log.

=head2 Ruleset definitions

Each data service may define one or more groups of rules for validating
request parameters, called "rulesets".  These are defined by calling the
C<define_ruleset> method of the data service object.

The first argument to C<define_ruleset> must be a string that provides the
name of the ruleset.  This must be unique among all of the rulesets defined
for this data service.  The remaining elements must be either hashrefs or
strings: the hashrefs define the individual rules, and the strings provide
documentation.  For example:

    $ds->define_ruleset( 'filters' =>
	{ param => 'lat', valid => DECI_VALUE('-90.0','90.0') },
	    "Return all datasets associated with the given latitude.",
	{ param => 'lng', valid => DECI_VALUE('-180.0','180.0') },
	    "Return all datasets associated with the given longitude.",
	{ together => ['lat', 'lng'], errmsg => "you must specify 'lng' and 'lat' together" },
	    "If either 'lat' or 'lng' is given, the other must be as well.",
	{ param => 'id', valid => POS_VALUE },
	    "Return the dataset with the given identifier",
	{ param => 'name', valid => STR_VALUE },
	    "Return all datasets with the given name");

These rulesets are selected using the node attribute C<ruleset>.  When a data
service request is handled, its parameters are automatically validated against
the ruleset (if any) specified by corresponding data service node.  If the
validation fails, then an HTTP 400 error ("bad request") is returned to the
client along with one or more error messages indicating how the parameter
values should be adjusted.  If the validation succeeds but warnings are
generated, those warnings are included as part of the response message.  If
the validation succeeds, the cleaned parameter values are made available
through methods of the request object (C<clean_param>, <clean_param_list>).

Ruleset validation is handled by the module L<HTTP::Validate>.  The
Web::DataService method alters the ruleset definitions as specified below, and
then hands off the resulting rulesets to the latter module.  See that module's
documentation for more information about how this process works.

=head2 Ruleset attributes

Each rule in a ruleset has a rule type.  The rule type is indicated by the
presence of a hash key corresponding to the type; each rule must have exactly
one such key.  The rule type keys are as follows:

=head3 parameter rules

The following three types of rules define the recognized parameter names.

=head4 param

    { param => <parameter_name>, valid => <validator> ... }

If the specified parameter is present, then its value must pass one of the
specified validators.  If it passes any of them, the rest are ignored.  If it
does not pass any of them, then an appropriate error message will be
generated.  If no validators are specified, then the value will be accepted no
matter what it is.

=head4 optional

    { optional => <parameter_name>, valid => <validator> ... }

An C<optional> rule is identical to a C<param> rule, except that the presence
or absence of the parameter will have no effect on whether or not the
containing ruleset is fulfilled. A ruleset in which all of the parameter rules
are C<optional> will always be fulfilled.  This kind of rule is useful in
validating URL parameters, especially for GET requests.

A special syntax is available which automatically generates validation rules
for any special parameters that have been enabled for this data service.  You
can provide any of the following as the parameter name in a rule of type
C<optional>:

=over 4

=item C<SPECIAL(parameter_name)>

This generates a rule for the specified special parameter, with the attributes
defaulting to appropriate values.  You are free to override these by
specifying any of the attributes explicitly.  Standard documentation is
provided by default, unless you specifically provide your own.

For example, the following definition will change the set
of acceptable values for the special parameter C<linebreak>.

    { param => 'SPECIAL(linebreak)', valid => ENUM_VALUE('cr', 'crlf', 'foo') }

You will often use this form with the special parameter C<show>, which is not
included in the lists shown below because the set of values it can take may
vary.  Unless your data service is very simple, you will probably need to
define multiple rulesets that specify this parameter, selecting the
appropriate validation set for each one.  For example, the following
definition specifies that the valid values for the special parameter C<show>
will be the values defined for the set C<extra>.  See the
L<tutorial|Web::DataService::Tutorial> for an example of how these are used.

    { param => 'SPECIAL(show)', valid => 'extra' }

=item C<SPECIAL(all)>

This generates a list of rules, one for each enabled special parameter except
C<show> and possibly C<vocab>, and except for any special parameters that have
been already defined in this ruleset.  The C<show> parameter is never
included, and C<vocab> is only included if any vocabulary other than
C<default> has been defined for this data service.  Each of these generated
rules includes standard documentation strings.  If you wish to override these
for certain parameters, define them explicitly using the form discussed above.

=item C<SPECIAL(single)>

This works similarly to C<SPECIAL(all)>, but only includes those parameters
that are relevant to single-record results.  The parameters C<limit>,
C<offset>, and C<count> are skipped.

=back

=head4 mandatory

    { mandatory => <parameter_name>, valid => <validator> ... }

A C<mandatory> rule is identical to a C<param> rule, except that the parameter
is required to be present with a non-empty value.  If it is not, then an error
message will be generated.  This kind of rule can be useful when validating
HTML form parameters.

=head3 parameter constraint rules

The following rule types can be used to specify additional constraints on the
presence or absence of parameter names.

=head4 together

    { together => [ <parameter_name> ... ] }

If one of the listed parameters is present, then all of them must be.
This can be used with parameters such as 'longitude' and 'latitude', where
neither one makes sense without the other.

=head4 at_most_one

    { at_most_one => [ <parameter_name> ... ] }

At most one of the listed parameters may be present.  This can be used along
with a series of C<param> rules to require that exactly one of a particular
set of parameters is provided.

=head4 ignore

    { ignore => [ <parameter_name> ... ] }

The specified parameter or parameters will be ignored if present, and will not
be included in the set of reported parameter values.  This rule can be used to
prevent requests from being rejected with "unrecognized parameter" errors in
cases where spurious parameters may be present.  If you are specifying only one
parameter name, it does need not be in a listref.

=head3 inclusion rules

The following rule types can be used to include one ruleset inside of another.
This allows you, for example, to define rulesets for validating different
groups of parameters and then combine them into specific rulesets for use with
different URL paths.

It is okay for an included ruleset to itself include other rulesets.  However,
any given ruleset is checked only once per validation no matter how many times
it is included.

=head4 allow

    { allow => <ruleset_name> }

A rule of this type is essentially an 'include' statement.  If this rule is
encountered during a validation, it causes the named ruleset to be checked
immediately.  It must pass, but does not have to be fulfilled.

=head4 require

    { require => <ruleset_name> }

This is a variant of C<allow>, with an additional constraint.  The validation
will fail unless the named ruleset not only passes but is also fulfilled by
the parameters.  You could use this, for example, with a query-type URL in
order to require that the query not be empty but instead contain at least one
significant criterion.  The parameters that count as "significant" would be
declared by C<param> rules, the others by C<optional> rules.

=head3 inclusion constraint rules

The following rule types can be used to specify additional constraints on the
inclusion of rulesets.

=head4 require_one

    { require_one => [ <ruleset_name> ... ] }

You can use a rule of this type to place an additional constraint on a list of
rulesets already included with C<allow> rules.  Exactly one of the named
rulesets must be fulfilled, or else the request is rejected.  You can use
this, for example, to ensure that a request includes either a parameter from
group A or one from group B, but not both.

=head4 require_any

    { require_any => [ <ruleset_name> ... ] }

This is a variant of C<require_one>.  At least one of the named rulesets must be
fulfilled, or else the request will be rejected.

=head4 allow_one

    { allow_one => [ <ruleset_name> ... ] }

Another variant of C<require_one>.  The request will be rejected if more than one
of the listed rulesets is fulfilled, but will pass if either none of them or
just one of them is fulfilled.  This can be used to allow optional parameters
from either group A or group B, but not from both groups. 

=head3 Other attributes

Any rule definition may also include one or more of the following keys:

=head4 errmsg

This key specifies the error message to be returned if the rule fails,
overriding the default message.  For example:

    $ds->define_ruleset( 'specifier' => 
        { param => 'name', valid => STRING_VALUE },
        { param => 'id', valid => POS_VALUE });
    
    $ds->define_ruleset( 'my_operation' =>
        { require => 'specifier', 
          errmsg => "you must specify either of the parameters 'name' or 'id'" });

Error messages may include any of the following placeholders: C<{param}>,
C<{value}>.  When included with a parameter rule these are replaced by the
parameter name and original parameter value(s), single-quoted.  When used with other
rules, {param} is replaced by the full list of relevant parameters or ruleset
names, quoted and separated by commas.  This feature allows you to define
common messages once and use them with multiple rules.

=head3 warn

This key causes a warning to be generated rather than an error if the
rule fails.  Unlike errors, warnings do not cause a request to be rejected.
Instead, they will automatically be returned as part of the data service response.

If the value of this key is 1, then what would otherwise be the error
message will be used as the warning message.  Otherwise, the specified string
will be used as the warning message.

=head3 key

The key 'key' specifies the name under which any inforamtion generated by
the rule will be saved.  For a parameter rule, the cleaned value will be saved
under this name.  For all rules, any generated warnings or errors will be
stored under the specified name instead of the parameter name or rule number.
This allows you to easily determine after a validation which
warnings or errors were generated.

The following keys can be used only with rules of type
C<param>, C<optional> or C<mandatory>:

=head3 valid

This key specifies the domain of acceptable values for a parameter.  The value
must be either a single string, a single code reference, or a list of code
references.  If you provide a string, it must be the name of a 
L<set|/Set definitions> previously defined for this data service.
Otherwise, you can either select from the list of
L<built-in validator functions|HTTP::Validate/VALIDATORS> 
or L<provide your own|HTTP::Validate/"Writing your own validator functions">.

If the parameter named by this rule is present, it must pass at least one of
the specified validators or else an error message will be generated.  If
multiple validators are given, then the error message returned will be the one
generated by the last validator in the list.  This can be overridden by using
the L</errmsg> key.

=head3 multiple

This key specifies that the parameter may appear multiple times in the
request.  Without this directive, multiple values for the same parameter will
generate an error.  For example:

    $ds->define_ruleset( 'identifiers' => 
	{ param => 'id', valid => POS_VALUE, multiple => 1 });

If this directive is used, then the cleaned value of the parameter will be a
list if at least one valid value was found and I<undef> otherwise.  If
you wish a request to be considered valid even if some of the values fail the
validator, then either use the L</list> key instead or include a
L</warn> key as well.

=head3 split

This directive has the same effect as L</multiple>, and in addition causes
each parameter value string to be split (L<perlfunc/split>) as indicated by the
value of the directive.  If this value is a string, then it will be compiled
into a regexp preceded and followed by C<\s*>.  So in the
following example:

    define_ruleset( 'identifiers' =>
        { param => 'id', valid => POS_VALUE, split => ',' });

The value string will be considered to be valid if it contains one or more
positive integers separated by commas and optional whitespace.  Empty strings
between separators are ignored.

    123,456		# returns [123, 456]
    123 , ,456		# returns [123, 456]
    , 456		# returns [456]
    123 456		# not valid
    123:456		# not valid

If you wish more precise control over the separator expression, you can pass a
regexp quoted with L<qr> instead.

=head3 list

This directive has the same effect as L</split>, but generates warnings
instead of error messages when invalid values are encountered (as if 
C<< warn => 1 >> was also specified).  The resulting cleaned value will be a
list containing any values which pass the validator, or I<undef> if no
valid values were found.  See also L</warn>.

=head3 alias

This directive specifies one or more aliases for the parameter name (use a
listref for multiple aliases).  These names may be used interchangeably in
requests, but any request that contains more than one of them will be rejected
with an appropriate error message unless L</multiple> is also specified.

=head3 default

This directive specifies a default value for the parameter, which will be
reported if no value is specified in the request.  If the rule also includes a
validator, the specified default value will be passed to it and the resulting
cleaned value, if any, will be used.  An exception will be thrown at the time
of rule definition if the default value does not pass the validator.

=head3 no_set_doc

If this directive is given a true value, then the documentation string for
this rule will not have a list of set values appended.  You can use this if
you are giving the name of a set as a validator, but do not wish to have the
list of set values automatically appended.

=head1 AUTHOR

mmcclenn "at" cpan.org

=head1 BUGS

Please report any bugs or feature requests to C<bug-web-dataservice at rt.cpan.org>, or through
the web interface at L<http://rt.cpan.org/NoAuth/ReportBug.html?Queue=Web-DataService>.  I will be notified, and then you'll
automatically be notified of progress on your bug as I make changes.

=head1 COPYRIGHT & LICENSE

Copyright 2014 Michael McClennen, all rights reserved.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the same terms as Perl itself.

=cut

